---
title: "Karim, S, Lucey, BM, Naeem, MA and Uddin, GS. \"Examining the interrelatedness of NFTs, DeFi tokens and cryptocurrencies.\" Finance Research Letters, 2022, Elsevier"
collection: notes
type: "Post"
permalink: /notes/20240805_xu_2022_sok
date: 2024-08-05
---

**Abstract**

```
Abstract—As an integral part of the decentralized finance (DeFi) ecosystem, DEX with AMM protocols have gained massive traction with the recently revived interest in blockchain and distributed ledger technology (DLT) in general. Instead of matching the buy and sell sides, AMMs employ a peer-to-pool method and determine asset price algorithmically through a so-called conservation function. To facilitate the improvement and development of AMM-based DEX, we create the first systematization of knowledge in this area. We first establish a general AMM framework describing the economics and formalizing the system’s state-space representation. We then employ our framework to systematically compare the top AMM protocols’ mechanics, illustrating their conservation functions, as well as slippage and divergence loss functions. We further discuss security and privacy concerns, how they are enabled by AMM-based DEX’s inherent properties, and explore mitigating solutions. Finally, we conduct a comprehensive literature review on related work covering both DeFi and conventional market microstructure.
```

  - **Citations**: 231
  - **Research objective**: Propose a general framework for thinking about decentralized automated market makers (incl. their mechanics, conservation functions, slippage, and divergence), and considering their security/privacy concerns.
  - **Key notes**:
    - Idea: provide a statement of knowledge on AMMs (-DEXs) more formally
    - protocol funded through accrued earnings
    - Preliminaries
      - actors: (1) liquidity providers (2) exchange users (traders) (3) protocol foundation
      - assets:
        - risk assets: e.g. token of interest on the exchange (such as DAI)
        - base assets: e.g. "stable" token on the exchange, say ETH
        - pool shares: you lock up X in the pool, get pool shares which increase proportionally to trading fees
        - protocol "governance" tokens
      - economics, rewards
        - liquidity rewards
        - staking rewards
        - governance rewards
        - security rewards
      - economics, explicit costs
        - liquidity withdrawal fee
        - swap fee
        - gas fee
      - economics, implicit costs
        - slippage: you always take liquidity in doing a trade, so instantaneous slippage. this is like a LOB except that you always move on the curve, whereas in traditional LOB, existing quantities of bid-ask may absorb your appetite to some degree.
        - divergence (impermanent) loss: value of assets in the pool fluctuates over time, so you may contribute X to the pool and yet when you want to withdraw, you only get 0.7X (in real terms of a currency pair, say against USDT or BTC.)
      - the general model of an AMM
        - comment on invalidity of only adding one asset to the pool: for liquidity provision/withdrawal, you cannot only add 1 asset because (by construction) it will throw off the relative proportions of the reserves, and there is no freedom to compute prices. In that sense, adding 1 asset would have to be recomputed across all assets to maintain the relative proportions. For trades, the free parameter is the price, so if you submit X of a reserve, the price and corresponding output gets computed so that the reserves are maintained.
        - tokens $k=1 \dots n$
        - system states are market data (quantities, prices): $\mathcal{X} = (r_k, p_k)_k$
          - so, system transitions $\mathcal{X} \to \mathcal{X}'$ under protocol $f$ and action $a$
          - (usually fixed) parameters $\mathcal{C}, \Omega$ representing conservation parameters (e.g. "constant" for constant-product) and protocol parameters, respectively
          - conservation law can be formulated as $Z((r_k)_k) - \mathcal{C} = 0$
        - actions and their rules
          - liquidity providers can add/withdraw liquidity but only in a fixed amount across all reserves
          - traders can exchange reserves for another but this modifies the price, and the amount you get back depends on how much you are trading
        - spot FX rate: $(\partial Z / \partial r_i) / (\partial Z / \partial r_j)$ which corresponds to 1/price for $j$
        - slippage:
          - there is always slippage because the price and output quantities are recomputed exactly after you submit your exchange amount, so you get a price like $(x + \delta x) / (y - \delta y)$ which differs between the output quantities.
          - computation steps, say you are locking up $x$ in exchange for $y$.
            - 1) update reserves by adding $x$
            - 2) rebalance reserves wrt. the conservation law, letting $y$ be the only thing that varies ("given the new amount $x$, what is the new amount of $y$")
            - 3) compute the needed change in $y$: $y \to y'$ and output the difference
        - divergence loss / impermanent loss: your loss by having your asset locked up and not being able to exchange it freely
          - computation steps (roughly)
            - as a preliminary, calculate original value of reserves, using the reserve's spot FX rates
            - outside the pool, let there be a small proportional increase $\rho>0$ in one asset $o$. compute (value in pool + increase outside pool) to obtain the value held. This represents the value of having that token (asset) outside the pool, noting that the increase is directly only on that token only.
            - now compute the counterfactual: as if the proportional increase was implemented within the pool via arbitrage as to balance out the reserves and respect the conservation law. In short this is saying that the "ex-pool" gains are implemented within the mechanics of the pool itself.
            - compare value held vs. that counterfactual.
      - kinds of attacks
        - infrastructural
        - block timestamp manipulation
        - transaction sequence manipulation
        - middleware-layer (exploit smart contracts)
        - reentrancy attacks
        - flash loan attacks.
          - Example: manipulating price on one AMM that is an oracle to another platform.
          - In short: (borrow A) --> (swap on an upstream AMM-oracle for B, making A cheaper there) --> (use that amount of B on a downstream lending platform to borrow A at the cheaper price) --> (pay back A with the cheaper price, keeping the premium).
          - say there are two tokens, $x_A$ and $x_B$ that have the same value at market price
          - swap $x_A \to x_B - \delta_1$ on an AMM $\mathcal{K}$.
            - Because there is now more $x_A$ than $x_B$ on the AMM, this pushes up the price of $x_B$ and pushes down the price of $x_A$.
            - Specifically, the price of $x_B$ goes from: $x_B/x_A$ \to $(x_B-\delta_2)/x_A$ for some $\delta_2 > \delta_1 > 0$.
            - On another platform that uses $\mathcal{K}$ as a price oracle (recalling we have made $X_A$ cheaper), put up your swap amount $x_B - \delta_1$ as collateral to get $x_A + \delta_3$.
            - Repay the flash loan $x_A$, keeping $\delta_3$.
  - **Overall impression**: ...
    - extremely useful mathematical framework for formalizing a decentralized exchange with an AMM mechanism.




